---
layout: default
title: Optics Assignment Subjective - Questions only.
nav_order: 3
description: ""
has_children: true
parent: Class 10 Modulus Physics
grand_parent: Home
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---

Here are the assignment problems:

## ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

### LEVEL-I

1.  A particle starting from rest and moving with a uniform acceleration, covers a distance X in the first 10 seconds. In the next 10 seconds it covers a distance of 30 metre more than what it covered in the first 10 seconds. Calculate the value of X . Also determine the velocity of the particle at the end of 30 seconds.
2.  A ball is projected vertically upward with a speed of $50 \mathrm{~m} / \mathrm{s}$. Find the speed at half the maximum height?
3.  An object 2 cm high, forms an inverted image 3 cm high, when the distance between the object and images is 10 cm . By drawing a geometric diagram, calculate the nature and the focal length of lens.
4.  A 5 cm tall object is placed on the principal axis of diverging lens of focal length 15 cm and at a distance of 10 cm from it. Find the nature, position and size of image.
5.  An object 6 cm high, is placed at a distance of 36 cm from a diverging lens of focal length 12 cm . By scale diagram find the position of size of image.

---

### LEVEL-II

1.  From the top of a tower of height h , a body is thrown vertically downwards with an initial velocity $u$ simultaneously, another body is thrown vertically upwards with an initial velocity $u$.
    (a) Will the bodies strike the ground at the same instant?
    (b) If not calculate the additional time require by the body thrown upwards.
    (c) Also find the difference in velocities of the two bodies at the instant they strike the ground.
2.  A ball is dropped from a height. If it takes 0.2 sec to cross the last 6 m before hitting the ground, find the height from which it was dropped. Take $g=10 \mathrm{~m} / \mathrm{s}^2$.
3.  Monochromatic light of wavelength 600 nm is incident from air on a glass surface. What are the wavelength, frequency and speed of the refracted light? $\mu$ of glass is 1.5 .
4.  The bottom of a container is 4 cm thick glass ( $\mu=1.5$ ) slab. The container contains two immiscible liquids A and B of depths 6 cm and 8 cm respectively. What is the apparent position of a scratch on outer surface of the bottom of the glass slab when viewed through the container? Refractive indices of A and B are 1.4 and 1.3 respectively.
5.  A needle placed 45 cm from a lens forms an image on a screen placed 90 cm on other side of the lens. Identify the type of lens and determine its focal length. What is the size of the image if the needle is 5 cm ?