---
layout: default
title: Force and Laws of Motion
nav_order: 1
description: ""
has_children: false
parent: 1 Concepts
# grand_patent: Class 9
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---

# Force and Laws of Motion

## FORCE

Force is external effort in the form of push or pull, which  
(1) produces or tries to produce motion in a body at rest, or   
(ii) stops or tries to stop a moving body or   
(iii) changes or tres to change the direction of motion of the body, or    
(Iv) changes or tries to change the shape of a body.

The following examples illustrate the above definition:   
(i) When we push a heavy stone, it does not move. The effort made in this case has only tried to produce motion.   
(ii) A ball falling downwards can be easily caught by our hands. The motion of the ball has been stopped.

**Resultant Force:**
If single force acting on a body produces the same acceleration as produced by a number of forces, that single force is called the resultant of these individual forces.

**Balanced and Unbalanced Forces:**
If a set of forces acting on a body produces no acceleration in it, the forces are said to be balanced. If it produces a nonzero acceleration, the forces are said to be unbalanced.

## INERTIA

It is inherent property of all bodies, by virtue of which it resists or opposes any change to its present state (of rest or of uniform motion). It varies directly as mass of the body.

Inertia of a Body is of Three Types

(a) Inertla of rest   
It is inability of a body to change by itself, its state of rest. This means a body at rest remains at rest and cannot start moving on its own.
e g. A person who is standing freely in a bus, thrown backward when bus starts suddenly.

(b) Inertia of motion   
It is inabillty of a body to change by itself its state of uniform motion l.c. a body in uniform motion can neither accelerate nor retard on its own and come to rest.
e.g. A person jumping out of a moving bus may fall forward.

(c) Inertia of Direction   
It is inability of a body to change by itself its direction of motion.
e.g. When a car goes round a curve suddenly, the person sitting inside is thrown outwards.

<p style="background-color:white; padding:15px; border-width:3px; border-color:#E5E7E9; border-style:solid; border-radius:6px">

<b>Exercise 1</b>:<br/>
(1). When wo shake a branch of a mango trea, the mangoes fall down, this happens because of lnertha, ......................<br/>
(ii). An umbrella protects us from rain. It is based on the property of inertia of ...................... <br/>
(iii). When a car untors a curved path, the person sitting in it is thrown ortwards. This is because of the property of inertia of ...................... <br/>
</p>

## NEWTON'S FIRST LAW OF MOTION

According to this law, a body continues to be in its state of rest or of uniform motion along a straight line unless it is acted upon by some external force to change the state. So we can say, mithout the application of an external force, body will not change any type of its inertia either the inertia of rest, inertia, of motion or inertia of direction.


<hr>
<b>Exercise 2</b>: 

(i). Choose the right answer: <br/>

$A$ and $B$ are two objects with masses $8 \mathrm{~kg}$ and $20 \mathrm{~kg}$ respectlvely, then:<br/>
&nbsp; (A) $A$ has more inertla than $ B $<br/>
&nbsp; (B) $B$ has more inertia than $A$<br/>
&nbsp; (C) $A$ and $B$ have the same inertla<br/>
&nbsp; (D) none of the two has inertia<br/>
(ii). Explain why, is it dangorous to jump out of a moving bus?<br/>
(iii). On what factor does the inertia of a body depends. Which has more inertia, a cricket ball or a rubber ball of the samo size?<br/>
</p>

<hr>