---
layout: default
title: 1.2 Momentum
nav_order: 2
description: ""
has_children: false
parent: 1 Concepts
# grand_patent: Class 9
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---
## MOMENTUM

Suppose we throw a cricket ball and a tennis ball, both with the same speed or velocity. It will be founc that more force is required to stop the cricket ball which has more mass and less force is required to stof the tennis ball (which has less mass). And if we throw two cricket ball of same mass but with differen speed or velocity. It will be found that more force is required to stop the ball having more velocity a: compared to the ball with less velocity. We conclude that there must be a physical quantity which depends on the mass of the body as well as on velocity of the body. That physical quantity is known a: "momentum". Thus, momentum of a body is defined as the product of its mass and velocity. **Momentu** is a is a measure of the quantity of motion of a body.

Thus, momentum $=$ mass $\times$ velocity
$$
\overrightarrow{\mathbf{P}}=\mathrm{m} \overrightarrow{\mathrm{v}}
$$

Where $\overrightarrow{\mathbf{P}}=$ momentum
$m=$ mass of the body
$\overrightarrow{\mathbf{v}}=$ velocity of the body.

Momentum is a vector quantity, and its direction is same as the direction of velocity. Its SI unit is kilogram - meter per second or $\mathrm{kg}$ - $\mathrm{m} / \mathrm{s}$.
<hr>
Exercise 3:<br/>

(1) Name the physical quantily whose unit is $\mathrm{kg} \mathrm{m} / \mathrm{s}$.<br>
(2). A body of mass $25 \mathrm{~kg}$ has a momentum of $25 \mathrm{~kg}$ $\mathrm{~m} / \mathrm{s}$. Calculate the velocity of the body?
<hr>
