---
layout: default
title: Metals and Non Metals 3.1 and 3.2
nav_order: 1
description: ""
has_children: true
parent: Class 10
grand_parent: Home
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---

# Metals and Non-metals

In Class IX you have learnt about various elements. You have seen that elements can be classified as metals or non-metals on the basis of their properties.
- Think of some uses of metals and non-metals in your daily life.
- What properties did you think of while categorising elements as metals or non-metals?
- How are these properties related to the uses of these elements? Let us look at some of these properties in detail.

## 3.1 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
### 3.1.1 Metals

The easiest way to start grouping substances is by comparing their physical properties. Let us study this with the help of the following activities. For performing Activities 3.1 to 3.6 , collect the samples of following metals - iron, copper, aluminium, magnesium, sodium, lead, zinc and any other metal that is easily available.

#### Activity 3.1
- Take samples of iron, copper, aluminium and magnesium. Note the appearance of each sample.
- Clean the surface of each sample by rubbing them with sand paper and note their appearance again.

Metals, in their pure state, have a shining surface. This property is called metallic lustre.

#### Activity 3.2
- Take small pieces of iron, copper, aluminium, and magnesium. Try to cut these metals with a sharp knife and note your observations.
- Hold a piece of sodium metal with a pair of tongs. **CAUTION:** Always handle sodium metal with care. Dry it by pressing between the folds of a filter paper.
- Put it on a watch-glass and try to cut it with a knife.
- What do you observe?

You will find that metals are generally hard. The hardness varies from metal to metal.

#### Activity 3.3
- Take pieces of iron, zinc, lead and copper.
- Place any one metal on a block of iron and strike it four or five times with a hammer. What do you observe?
- Repeat with other metals.
- Record the change in the shape of these metals.

You will find that some metals can be beaten into thin sheets. This property is called malleability. Did you know that gold and silver are the most malleable metals?

#### Activity 3.4
- List the metals whose wires you have seen in daily life.

The ability of metals to be drawn into thin wires is called ductility. Gold is the most ductile metal. You will be surprised to know that a wire of about 2 km length can be drawn from one gram of gold.

It is because of their malleability and ductility that metals can be given different shapes according to our needs.

Can you name some metals that are used for making cooking vessels? Do you know why these metals are used for making vessels? Let us do the following Activity to find out the answer.

#### Activity 3.5
- Take an aluminium or copper wire. Clamp this wire on a stand, as shown in Fig. 3.1.
- Fix a pin to the free end of the wire using wax.
- Heat the wire with a spirit lamp, candle or a burner near the place where it is clamped.
- What do you observe after some time?
- Note your observations. Does the metal wire melt?

**Figure 3.1**
Metals are good conductors of heat.

The above activity shows that metals are good conductors of heat and have high melting points. The best conductors of heat are silver and copper. Lead and mercury are comparatively poor conductors of heat.

Do metals also conduct electricity? Let us find out.

#### Activity 3.6
- Set up an electric circuit as shown in Fig. 3.2.
- Place the metal to be tested in the circuit between terminals A and B as shown.
- Does the bulb glow? What does this indicate?

**Figure 3.2**
Metals are good conductors of electricity.

You must have seen that the wires that carry current in your homes have a coating of polyvinylchloride (PVC) or a rubber-like material. Why are electric wires coated with such substances?

What happens when metals strike a hard surface? Do they produce a sound? The metals that produce a sound on striking a hard surface are said to be sonorous. Can you now say why school bells are made of metals?

### 3.1.2 Non-metals

In the previous Class you have learnt that there are very few non-metals as compared to metals. Some of the examples of non-metals are carbon, sulphur, iodine, oxygen, hydrogen, etc. The non-metals are either solids or gases except bromine which is a liquid.

Do non-metals also have physical properties similar to that of metals? Let us find out.

#### Activity 3.7
- Collect samples of carbon (coal or graphite), sulphur and iodine.
- Carry out the Activities 3.1 to 3.4 and 3.6 with these non-metals and record your observations.

Compile your observations regarding metals and non-metals in Table 3.1.

#### Activity 3.8
- Take a magnesium ribbon and some sulphur powder.
- Burn the magnesium ribbon. Collect the ashes formed and dissolve them in water.
- Test the resultant solution with both red and blue litmus paper.
- Is the product formed on burning magnesium acidic or basic?
- Now burn sulphur powder. Place a test tube over the burning sulphur to collect the fumes produced.
- Add some water to the above test tube and shake.
- Test this solution with blue and red litmus paper.
- Is the product formed on burning sulphur acidic or basic?
- Can you write equations for these reactions?

**Observations and Solutions:**

1.  **Magnesium (Metal):**
    *   **Burning:** Magnesium burns with a dazzling white flame to form a white powder (ash) of Magnesium Oxide.
        $$2Mg(s) + O_2(g) \rightarrow 2MgO(s)$$
    *   **Dissolving in Water:** Magnesium oxide dissolves in water to form Magnesium Hydroxide.
        $$MgO(s) + H_2O(l) \rightarrow Mg(OH)_2(aq)$$
    *   **Litmus Test:** The solution turns **red litmus to blue**.
    *   **Conclusion:** Magnesium oxide is **basic** in nature. Generally, metal oxides are basic.

2.  **Sulphur (Non-metal):**
    *   **Burning:** Sulphur burns in air to form Sulphur Dioxide gas.
        $$S(s) + O_2(g) \rightarrow SO_2(g)$$
    *   **Dissolving in Water:** Sulphur dioxide dissolves in water to form Sulphurous Acid.
        $$SO_2(g) + H_2O(l) \rightarrow H_2SO_3(aq)$$
    *   **Litmus Test:** The solution turns **blue litmus to red**.
    *   **Conclusion:** Sulphur dioxide is **acidic** in nature. Generally, non-metal oxides are acidic.



Most non-metals produce acidic oxides when dissolve in water. On the other hand, most metals, give rise to basic oxides. You will be learning more about these metal oxides in the next section.

## 3.2 CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF METALS

We will learn about the chemical properties of metals in the following Sections 3.2.1 to 3.2.4. For this, collect the samples of following metals aluminium, copper, iron, lead, magnesium, zinc and sodium.

### 3.2.1 What happens when Metals are burnt in Air?

You have seen in Activity 3.8 that magnesium burns in air with a dazzling white flame. Do all metals react in the same manner? Let us check by performing the following Activity.

#### Activity 3.9
**CAUTION:** The following activity needs the teacher's assistance. It would be better if students wear eye protection.
- Hold any of the samples taken above with a pair of tongs and try burning over a flame. Repeat with the other metal samples.
- Collect the product if formed.
- Let the products and the metal surface cool down.
- Which metals burn easily?
- What flame colour did you observe when the metal burnt?
- How does the metal surface appear after burning?
- Arrange the metals in the decreasing order of their reactivity towards oxygen.
- Are the products soluble in water?
