---
layout: default
title: 5.2.2 Solved Problems Q and A
nav_order: 4
description: ""
has_children: false
parent: 5 Solved Problems Index
# grand_patent: Class 9
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---
# Section - B

**Problem 1:** Two bobs of masses 1 kg and 2 kg are suspended from a rigid support by threads of lengths 4 m and 1 m respectively. Find the ratio of their time periods.

**Solution:** Time period of a pendulum is given by $T=2 \pi \sqrt{\frac{L}{g}}$. It does not depend on the mass of the bob. If $T_1$ and $T_2$ are their time-periods, then $\frac{T_1}{T_2}=\sqrt{\frac{L_1}{L_2}}=\sqrt{\frac{4}{1}}=2$

**Problem 2:** A simple pendulum has a time period of 1.0 sec at the earth's surface. It is taken to a height $R_\theta / 2$ above the earth's surface, where $R_\theta$ is the radius of the earth. Find the time period.

**Solution:** $\quad$ Acceleration due to gravity at the earth's surface: $g=\frac{\mathrm{GM}_{\mathrm{e}}}{\mathrm{R}_{\mathrm{e}}^2}$
Acceleration due to gravity at a height $R_e+\frac{R_e}{2}=\frac{3 R_e}{2}$ from the centre of the earth.

$
g^{\prime}=\frac{\mathrm{GM}_{\mathrm{e}}}{\left(\frac{3}{2} R_e\right)^2}=\frac{4}{9}\left(\frac{\mathrm{GM}_e}{\mathrm{R}_e^2}\right)=\frac{4 \mathrm{~g}}{9}
$


Time period at earth's surface is $1.0=2 \pi \sqrt{\frac{L}{g}}$ and time period at the height $R_0 / 2$ is $T=2 \pi \sqrt{\frac{\mathrm{~L}}{\mathrm{~g}^{\prime}}}$

$
\therefore \quad \frac{\mathrm{T}}{1.0}=\sqrt{\frac{\mathrm{g}}{\mathrm{~g}^{\prime}}}=\sqrt{\frac{\mathrm{g}}{4 \mathrm{~g} / 9}}=\frac{3}{2} \Rightarrow \mathrm{~T}=1.5 \mathrm{sec} .
$

**Problem 3:** A car approaches a hill with a constant speed. When it is at a distance of 0.96 km it blows a whistle, whose echo is heard by the driver 6 sec later. If the speed of sound in air is 300 $\mathrm{m} / \mathrm{s}$, Calculate the speed of car?

Let the speed of car is $v$ Distance travelled by car in 6 sec $\mathrm{s}=\mathrm{vt}=6 \mathrm{v}$
Now, distance travelled by sound

$
\begin{aligned}
& D=2 d-s \newline
& D=1920-6 v
\end{aligned}
$


We know, time taken $\mathrm{t}=\frac{\text { Distance travelled }(\mathrm{D})}{\text { speed of sound }(\mathrm{v})}$  
$\therefore \quad$ Speed of sound $(\mathrm{v})=300 \mathrm{~m} / \mathrm{s}$  
Hence $6=\frac{1920-6 v}{300} \Rightarrow v=20 \mathrm{~m} / \mathrm{s}$.  

**Problem 4:** Helmet of a construction worker falls from height 78.4 m above the ground. He hears the sound of the helmet hitting the ground 4.23 seconds after it falls. Find the speed of sound in air.

**Solution:** $\quad$ Let it strikes the ground after time $t$
Using $\mathrm{h}=\mathrm{ut}+\frac{1}{2} \mathrm{gt}^2 \Rightarrow \mathrm{t}=\sqrt{\frac{2 \mathrm{~h}}{\mathrm{~g}}}=4$ seconds  
Now time taken by sound to travel 78.4 m is $(4.23-4)$ seconds $=0.23 \mathrm{~s}$.  
Therefore the speed of sound in air is $=\frac{78.4 \mathrm{~m}}{0.23 \mathrm{~s}}=340.87 \mathrm{~m} / \mathrm{s}$.  

**Problem 5:** A ship explodes on the surface of the sea. At the same instant an aircraft \& a submarine are present vertically above and below the ship, at equal distances from it. Find the ratio of the times taken by the sound waves to reach them.  
(speed of sound in air $=340 \mathrm{~m} / \mathrm{s}$., speed of sound in sea water $=1520 \mathrm{~m} / \mathrm{s}$.)
..


## Rough work  

**Problem 1**  
$T =  2 \pi \sqrt{L/g} $  
$T_1 = 2 \pi \sqrt{4/g} $  
$T_2 = 2 \pi \sqrt{1/g} $  

$ \frac{T_1}{T_2} = \sqrt{\frac{4}{1}}=2 $

**Problem 2: **

Gravity at earth's surface = $g = GM/R^2$  
At height $g^`= ?$  
$\mathrm{g}^{\prime}=\frac{G M}{(\mathrm{R}+\mathrm{h})^2}$

$ \mathrm{g}^{\prime}=\frac{G M}{(\mathrm{R}+\mathrm{\frac{R}{2}})^2}$ = $\frac{G M}{\frac{4}{9}\mathrm{R^2}}
$

$ \mathrm{g}^{\prime}= \frac{9GM}{4R^2}$

$ \frac{g}{g^\prime} = \frac{4}{9}$ .. eq 1

$ \frac{T^\prime}{T} = \frac{2 \pi \sqrt{L/g}}{2 \pi \sqrt{L/g^\prime}}$

$ \frac{T^\prime}{T} = \sqrt{\frac{g^\prime}{g}} $

Substitute equation 1

$ \frac{T^\prime}{T} = \sqrt{\frac{9}{4}} = \frac{3}{2} $

$ T^\prime = 1.5 \text{ sec}$

**Problem 3:**  
Time taken by horn to go and come back = $6 sec$  
Let d be the distance travelled by car in 6 secs.  
Total distance travelled by sound = $ 1920 - d $.

$ \frac{1920-\mathrm{d}}{300} = 6 $    
$ d = 1920  - 1800 = 120 \mathrm{m}$   
Velocity of Car = $v$ = $ \frac{120}{6}$ = $20 \text{ }\mathrm{m/s} $   


