---
layout: default
title: 3 - Sequence and Series
nav_order: 1
description: ""
has_children: true
parent: Class 10 Modulus Maths
grand_parent: Home
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
---

# Sequence

A succession of terms $a_1, a_2, a_3, a_4, \ldots$ formed according to some rule or law.
Examples are: $1,4,9,16,25$

$$
\begin{gathered}
-1,1,-1,1, \ldots \\
\frac{x}{1!}, \frac{x^2}{2!}, \frac{x^3}{3!}, \frac{x^4}{4!}, \ldots
\end{gathered}
$$


A finite sequence has a finite (i.e., limited) number of terms, as in the first example above. An infinite sequence has an unlimited number of terms, i.e., there is no last term, as in the second and third examples.

Series
The indicated sum of the terms of a sequence. In the case of a finite sequence $a_1, a_2, a_3, \ldots, a_n$ the corresponding series is:

$$
a_1+a_2+a_3+\ldots+a_n=\sum_{k=1}^n a_k
$$


This series has a finite or limited number of terms and is called a finite series.

## Arithmetic Progression (A.P.)

A.P. is a sequence whose terms differ by a fixed number. This fixed number is called the common difference. If $a$ is the first term and $d$ the common difference, then A.P. can be written as

$$
a, a+d, a+2 d, \ldots, a+(n-1) d, \ldots
$$

(a) $n^{\text {th }}$ term of $\operatorname{AP} T_n=a+(n-1) d$, where $d=t_n-t_{n-1}$
(b) The sum of the first terms:

$$
S_n=\frac{n}{2}[a+\ell]=\frac{n}{2}[2 a+(n-1) d]
$$

where $l$ is $n^{\text {th }}$ term.

Notes
1. $n^{\text {th }}$ term of an A.P. is of the form $A n+B$ i.e., a linear expression in ' $n$ ', in such a case the coefficient of $n$ is the common difference of the A.P., i.e., $A$.
2. Sum of first ' $n$ ' terms of an A.P. is of the form $A n^2+B n$, i.e., a quadratic expression in ' $n$ ', in such case the common difference is twice the coefficient of $n^2$. i.e., $2 A$.
3. Also $n^{\text {th }}$ term $T_n=S_n-S_{n-1}$.

### Properties of A.P.

(a). If each term of an A.P. is increased, decreased, multiplied, or divided by the some nonzero number, then the resulting sequence is also an A.P.

(b). Three numbers in A.P.: $a-d, a, a+d$  
    Four numbers in A.P.: $a-3 d, a-d, a+d, a+3 d$  
    Five numbers in A.P.: $a-2 d, a-d, a, a+d, a+2 d$  
    Six numbers in A.P.: $a-5 d, a-3 d, a-d, a+d, a+3 d, a+5 d$  

(c) The common difference can be zero, positive, or negative.