---
layout: default
title: Generated Questions Solutions Concentration Terms
nav_order: 5
description: ""
has_children: false
parent: Class 9 Fiitjee Phasebook Chemsitry
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---

### Questions - Solutions Concentration Material

1. **A solution is a __________.**
   - A) Heterogeneous mixture of substances
   - B) Homogeneous mixture of two or more pure substances
   - C) Single substance in pure form
   - D) Mixture of liquids only

2. **Which component is considered the solvent in a solution?**
   - A) The substance in larger quantity
   - B) The substance in smaller quantity
   - C) The substance in gaseous form
   - D) The substance with higher density

3. **An aqueous solution is one where the solvent is __________.**
   - A) Alcohol
   - B) Oil
   - C) Water
   - D) Ether

4. **A solution with relatively more solute is termed as __________.**
   - A) Dilute solution
   - B) Concentrated solution
   - C) Saturated solution
   - D) Unsaturated solution

5. **A solution in which no more solute can dissolve at a given temperature is called __________.**
   - A) Saturated solution
   - B) Unsaturated solution
   - C) Supersaturated solution
   - D) Dilute solution

6. **The solubility of a solute generally __________ with temperature if the dissolution process is endothermic.**
   - A) Increases
   - B) Decreases
   - C) Remains the same
   - D) Becomes zero

7. **Which of the following factors does not affect solubility?**
   - A) Nature of solute
   - B) Nature of solvent
   - C) Temperature
   - D) Color of solute

8. **The statement “like dissolves in like” refers to the solubility of __________.**
   - A) Polar and non-polar compounds
   - B) Polar compounds in polar solvents and non-polar compounds in non-polar solvents
   - C) Polar compounds in non-polar solvents
   - D) All types of compounds in all solvents

9. **Which type of solution will allow more solute to dissolve if the temperature is increased?**
   - A) Saturated solution
   - B) Supersaturated solution
   - C) Unsaturated solution
   - D) Concentrated solution

10. **The percentage composition of a solution can be expressed as __________.**
    - A) Weight-weight system
    - B) Volume-volume system
    - C) Weight-volume system
    - D) All of the above

11. **Which of the following has a weight percentage of 15%?**
    - A) 5g of sodium carbonate in 95g of water
    - B) 15g of oxalic acid in 150g of solution
    - C) 10g of sodium chloride in 190g of water
    - D) 25g of potassium iodide in 400g of solution

12. **A solution with a concentration of 2M means it contains __________.**
    - A) 2 moles of solute in 1 liter of solution
    - B) 2 grams of solute in 1 liter of solution
    - C) 2 moles of solvent in 1 liter of solution
    - D) 2 grams of solvent in 1 liter of solution

13. **Molality is defined as the number of moles of solute per __________.**
    - A) Kilogram of solvent
    - B) Liter of solution
    - C) Mole of solution
    - D) Kilogram of solution

14. **Which of the following is true for a true solution?**
    - A) Particles settle on standing
    - B) Particles are visible under a microscope
    - C) Particles are larger than 10-7 cm
    - D) The solution is homogeneous in nature

15. **A colloidal solution has particles that are __________.**
    - A) Larger than in a true solution but smaller than in a suspension
    - B) Smaller than in a true solution
    - C) Visible to the naked eye
    - D) Non-existent

16. **Tyndall effect is observed in __________.**
    - A) True solutions
    - B) Colloidal solutions
    - C) Suspensions only
    - D) Pure solvents

17. **Brownian movement is caused by __________.**
    - A) Attraction between charges on colloidal particles
    - B) Temperature fluctuations
    - C) Impact of molecules of the dispersion medium on colloidal particles
    - D) Convection currents

18. **Electrophoresis refers to the movement of colloidal particles under __________.**
    - A) Gravitational field
    - B) Magnetic field
    - C) Electric field
    - D) Thermal field

19. **Normality of a solution is defined as the number of __________ per liter of solution.**
    - A) Moles
    - B) Molecules
    - C) Equivalents
    - D) Ions

20. **Which of the following describes a suspension?**
    - A) Homogeneous mixture
    - B) Heterogeneous mixture with particles larger than 10-5 cm
    - C) True solution with particles smaller than 10-7 cm
    - D) Colloidal solution with particles between 10-7 cm and 10-5 cm

21. **What is the molarity of a solution containing 2.12 grams of Na2CO3 in 250 ml of solution? (Molecular weight of Na2CO3 = 106)**
    - A) 0.08 M
    - B) 0.1 M
    - C) 1 M
    - D) 2 M

22. **Calculate the number of moles of NaOH present in 750ml of a 0.4M solution.**
    - A) 0.3 Moles
    - B) 0.4 Moles
    - C) 0.75 Moles
    - D) 0.5 Moles

23. **In a mole fraction, the denominator is the __________.**
    - A) Number of moles of solvent
    - B) Number of moles of solute
    - C) Total number of moles in the solution
    - D) None of the above

24. **If a solution contains 4g of NaOH dissolved in 250g of water, the molality is __________.**
    - A) 0.4 m
    - B) 0.2 m
    - C) 0.1 m
    - D) 0.8 m

25. **Which of the following will increase the rate of solubility of a gas in a liquid?**
    - A) Increasing temperature
    - B) Decreasing pressure
    - C) Decreasing temperature
    - D) Adding a non-polar solvent

26. **Which of the following solutions is an example of a colloid?**
    - A) Muddy water
    - B) Sugar in water
    - C) Milk
    - D) Salt in water

27. **The mole fraction of NaOH in a solution containing 4 grams of NaOH and 36.2 grams of water (Molecular weight of NaOH = 40, H2O = 18) is __________.**
    - A) 0.1
    - B) 0.2
    - C) 0.025
    - D) 0.05

28. **Normality of a 0.5 M Sulfuric acid (H2SO4) solution is __________.**
    - A) 1 N
    - B) 0.5 N
    - C) 2 N
    - D) 1.5 N

29. **Which of the following is a true statement about molality?**
    - A) It is temperature-dependent
    - B) It involves the mass of the solvent
    - C) It involves the volume of the solvent
    - D) It is the same as molarity

30. **If 5.85g of NaCl are dissolved in 90g of water, the mole fraction of NaCl is __________.**
    - A) 0.01
    - B) 0.0196
    - C) 0.1
    - D) 0.2

## Answer Key

1. **Answer:** B
2. **Answer:** A
3. **Answer:** C
4. **Answer:** B
5. **Answer:** A
6. **Answer:** A
7. **Answer:** D
8. **Answer:** B
9. **Answer:** C
10. **Answer:** D
11. **Answer:** B
12. **Answer:** A
13. **Answer:** A
14. **Answer:** D
15. **Answer:** A
16. **Answer:** B
17. **Answer:** C
18. **Answer:** C
19. **Answer:** C
20. **Answer:** B
21. **Answer:** A
22. **Answer:** A
23. **Answer:** C
24. **Answer:** A
25. **Answer:** C
26. **Answer:** C
27. **Answer:** A
28. **Answer:** A
29. **Answer:** B
30. **Answer:** B

