---
layout: default
title: 1.9.1 Solved Problems with Solutions
nav_order: 2
description: ""
has_children: true
parent: 1.9 Solved Problems
grand_parent: Class 10 Chemistry 
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---

# Section - A

**Problem 1**: Which type of reaction is this: $2 \mathrm{NaHCO}_3 \xrightarrow{\Delta} \mathrm{Na}_2 \mathrm{CO}_3+\mathrm{CO}_2+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}$  
**Solution**: Decomposition reaction  
**Problem 2**: What is the type of reaction in which two or more reactants combine to give one product?    
**Solution**: Combination reaction    
**Problem 3**: What is the type of reaction in which gain of electrons takes place?  
**Solution**: Reduction reaction    
**Problem 4**: What do you mean by single displacement reaction?  
**Solution**: A reaction in which an atom or a group of atoms present in a molecule is displaced by another atom, is known as single displacement reaction.  

**Problem 5**: Balance the chemical equations:  

$
\mathrm{H}_3 \mathrm{PO}_4+\mathrm{Mg}(\mathrm{OH})_2 \longrightarrow \mathrm{Mg}_3\left(\mathrm{PO}_4\right)_2+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}
$


**Solution**: $\quad 2 \mathrm{H}_3 \mathrm{PO}_4+3 \mathrm{Mg}(\mathrm{OH})_2 \longrightarrow \mathrm{Mg}_3\left(\mathrm{PO}_4\right)_2+6 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}$

**Problem 6**: Balance the chemical equations:

$
\mathrm{KOH}+\mathrm{HBr} \longrightarrow \mathrm{KBr}+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}
$


**Solution**: $\mathrm{KOH}+\mathrm{HBr} \longrightarrow \mathrm{KBr}+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}$  
**Problem 7**: In the redox reaction:

$
\mathrm{Cu}^{2+}+\mathrm{Zn} \longrightarrow \mathrm{Cu}+\mathrm{Zn}^{2+}
$

Name: (i) oxidizing agent
(ii) substance oxidized
(iii) substance gaining electrons

**Solution**:
(i) The substance which accepts electron is known as oxidizing agent. Here, $\mathrm{Cu}^{2+}$ ion accepts 2 electrons to form Cu atom. $\mathrm{Cu}^{2+}$ ion is the oxidizing agent.
(ii) The substance which loses electrons is said to be oxidized. In this reaction Zn atom loses 2 electrons to form $\mathrm{Zn}^{2+}$ ion. $\mathrm{So}, \mathrm{Zn}$ is the substance being oxidized.
(iii) $\mathrm{The} \mathrm{Cu}^{2+}$ ion is gaining the electrons.  

**Problem 8**: In the formation of a compound $A B_2$ atoms of element $A$ lost 2 electrons each while the atoms of elements B gained 1 electron each.
Which element is oxidized in the formation of $A B_2$ ?

**Problem 9**: In the formation of a compound $A B_2$, atoms of element $A$ lost 2 electrons each while the atoms of elements B gained 1 electron each.
Which elements is reduced in the formation of $A B_2$ ?
**Solution**: B

**Problem 10**: In the formation of a compound $A B_2$, atoms of element $A$ lost 2 electrons each while the atoms of elements B gained 1 electron each.
Which element acts as an oxidizing agent?
**Solution**: B

**Problem 11**: In the formation of a compound $A B_2$, atoms of element $A$ lost 2 electrons each while the atoms of elements B gained 1 electron each.
Which element acts as a reducing agent?
**Solution**: A

**Problem 12**: Write the formula for each material correctly and then balance the equation.
For each reaction tell what type of reaction it is
(i) sulphuric acid reacts with zinc
(ii) acetic acid ionizes.
(iii) steam with methane to get hydrogen and carbon dioxide

**Solution**:
(i) $\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{SO}_4+\mathrm{Zn} \longrightarrow \mathrm{ZnSO}_4+\mathrm{H}_2$

Single displacement
(ii) $\mathrm{CH}_3 \mathrm{COOH} \longleftrightarrow \mathrm{CH}_3 \mathrm{COO}^{-}+\mathrm{H}^{+}$

Ionization (Notice that it is reversible)
(iii) $2 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}+\mathrm{CH}_4 \longrightarrow 4 \mathrm{H}_2+\mathrm{CO}_2$

**Problem 13**: Write the formula for each material correctly and then balance the equation. For each reaction tell what type of reaction it is
(i) copper metal and silver nitrate react to form silver metal and copper II nitrate.
(ii) sodium metal and chlorine react to make sodium chloride.
(iii) calcium phosphate and sulfuric acid make calcium sulfate and phosphoric acid.

**Solution**:
(i) $\mathrm{Cu}+2 \mathrm{AgNO}_3 \longrightarrow 2 \mathrm{Ag}+\mathrm{Cu}\left(\mathrm{NO}_3\right)_2$

Single displacement
(ii) $2 \mathrm{Na}+\mathrm{Cl}_2 \longrightarrow 2 \mathrm{NaCl}$

Synthesis
(iii) $\mathrm{Ca}_3\left(\mathrm{PO}_4\right)_2+3 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{SO}_4 \longrightarrow 3 \mathrm{CaSO}_4+2 \mathrm{H}_3 \mathrm{PO}_4$

Double displacement  
**Problem 14**: Write the formula for each material correctly and then balance the equation. For each reaction tell what type of reaction it is
(a) Zinc sulphide and oxygen become zinc oxide and sulphur.
(b) Lithium oxide and water make lithium hydroxide.
(c) Aluminium hydroxide and sulphuric acid neutralize to make water and aluminium sulphate

**Solution**:
(a) $2 \mathrm{ZnS}+\mathrm{O}_2 \longrightarrow 2 \mathrm{ZnO}+2 \mathrm{~S}$

Single displacement
(b) $\mathrm{Li}_2 \mathrm{O}+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O} \longrightarrow 2 \mathrm{LiOH}$

Synthesis
(c) $2 \mathrm{Al}(\mathrm{OH})_3+3 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{SO}_4 \longrightarrow 6 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}+\mathrm{Al}_2\left(\mathrm{SO}_4\right)_3$

Double displacement or Acid-Base Neutralization

**Problem 15**: Write the formula for each material correctly and then balance the equation.
For each reaction tell what type of reaction it is
(a) Sulphur burns in oxygen to make sulphur dioxide.
(b) Barium hydroxide and sulphuric acid make water and barium sulphate.
(c) Aluminium sulphate and calcium hydroxide become aluminum hydroxide and calcium sulphate.

**Solution**:
(a) $\mathrm{S}+\mathrm{O}_2 \longrightarrow \mathrm{SO}_2$

Synthesis
(b) $\mathrm{Ba}(\mathrm{OH})_2+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{SO}_4 \longrightarrow 2 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}+\mathrm{BaSO}_4$

Double displacement or Acid-Base Neutralization
(c) $\mathrm{Al}_2\left(\mathrm{SO}_4\right)_3+3 \mathrm{Ca}(\mathrm{OH})_2 \longrightarrow 2 \mathrm{Al}(\mathrm{OH})_3 \downarrow+3 \mathrm{CaSO}_4 \downarrow$

Double displacement
(Both calcium sulphate and aluminum hydroxide are precipitates.)
**Problem 16**: Balance the following chemical equations:
(i) $\mathrm{FeS}_2+\mathrm{O}_2 \longrightarrow \mathrm{Fe}_2 \mathrm{O}_3+\mathrm{SO}_2$
(ii) $\mathrm{C}+\mathrm{SO}_2 \longrightarrow \mathrm{CS}_2+\mathrm{CO}$

**Solution**:
(i) $4 \mathrm{FeS}_2+11 \mathrm{O}_2 \longrightarrow 2 \mathrm{Fe}_2 \mathrm{O}_3+8 \mathrm{SO}_2$  
(ii) $5 \mathrm{C}+2 \mathrm{SO}_2 \longrightarrow \mathrm{CS}_2+4 \mathrm{CO}  $