---
layout: default
title: 1.9.1 Solved Problems Q Only
nav_order: 1
description: ""
has_children: true
parent: 1.9 Solved Problems
grand_parent: Class 10 Chemistry 
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---

# Section - A

**Problem 1**: Which type of reaction is this: $2 \mathrm{NaHCO}_3   \xrightarrow{\Delta} \mathrm{Na}_2 \mathrm{CO}_3+\mathrm{CO}_2+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}$

**Problem 2**: What is the type of reaction in which two or more reactants combine to give one product?

**Problem 3**: What is the type of reaction in which gain of electrons takes place?

**Problem 4**: What do you mean by single displacement reaction?


**Problem 5**: Balance the chemical equations:

$
\mathrm{H}_3 \mathrm{PO}_4+\mathrm{Mg}(\mathrm{OH})_2 \longrightarrow \mathrm{Mg}_3\left(\mathrm{PO}_4\right)_2+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}
$


**Problem 6**: Balance the chemical equations:

$
\mathrm{KOH}+\mathrm{HBr} \longrightarrow \mathrm{KBr}+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}
$


**Problem 7**: In the redox reaction:

$
\mathrm{Cu}^{2+}+\mathrm{Zn} \longrightarrow \mathrm{Cu}+\mathrm{Zn}^{2+}
$


Name: (i) oxidizing agent
(ii) substance oxidized
(iii) substance gaining electrons



**Problem 8**: In the formation of a compound $A B_2$ atoms of element $A$ lost 2 electrons each while the atoms of elements B gained 1 electron each.
Which element is oxidized in the formation of $A B_2$ ?

**Problem 9**: In the formation of a compound $A B_2$, atoms of element $A$ lost 2 electrons each while the atoms of elements B gained 1 electron each.
Which elements is reduced in the formation of $A B_2$ ?


**Problem 10**: In the formation of a compound $A B_2$, atoms of element $A$ lost 2 electrons each while the atoms of elements B gained 1 electron each.
Which element acts as an oxidizing agent?


**Problem 11**: In the formation of a compound $A B_2$, atoms of element $A$ lost 2 electrons each while the atoms of elements B gained 1 electron each.
Which element acts as a reducing agent?


**Problem 12**: Write the formula for each material correctly and then balance the equation.
For each reaction tell what type of reaction it is
(i) sulphuric acid reacts with zinc
(ii) acetic acid ionizes.
(iii) steam with methane to get hydrogen and carbon dioxide


**Problem 13**: Write the formula for each material correctly and then balance the equation. For each reaction tell what type of reaction it is
(i) copper metal and silver nitrate react to form silver metal and copper II nitrate.
(ii) sodium metal and chlorine react to make sodium chloride.
(iii) calcium phosphate and sulfuric acid make calcium sulfate and phosphoric acid.

**Problem 14**: Write the formula for each material correctly and then balance the equation. For each reaction tell what type of reaction it is
(a) Zinc sulphide and oxygen become zinc oxide and sulphur.
(b) Lithium oxide and water make lithium hydroxide.
(c) Aluminium hydroxide and sulphuric acid neutralize to make water and aluminium sulphate

**Problem 15**: Write the formula for each material correctly and then balance the equation.
For each reaction tell what type of reaction it is
(a) Sulphur burns in oxygen to make sulphur dioxide.
(b) Barium hydroxide and sulphuric acid make water and barium sulphate.
(c) Aluminium sulphate and calcium hydroxide become aluminum hydroxide and calcium sulphate.

**Problem 16**: Balance the following chemical equations:  
(i) $\mathrm{FeS}_2+\mathrm{O}_2 \longrightarrow \mathrm{Fe}_2 \mathrm{O}_3+\mathrm{SO}_2$  
(ii) $\mathrm{C}+\mathrm{SO}_2 \longrightarrow \mathrm{CS}_2+\mathrm{CO}$  

**Problem 17**: Vector Database Architecture

The following diagram illustrates the architecture of a vector database system:
