---
layout: default
title: 1.10.3 CHAPTER PRACTICE PROBLEMS OBJECTIVE
nav_order: 3
description: ""
has_children: true
parent: 1.10 CHAPTER PRACTICE PROBLEM
grand_parent: FIITJEE Phase 5 Chemistry 
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---

# CHAPTER PRACTICE PROBLEMS
OBJECTIVE


## Section - II

### Multiple Choice Questions (Single Option Correct)

### 1. Which of the following is an example of a neutralization reaction?
(a) $\mathrm{HCl}(\mathrm{aq})+\mathrm{NaOH}(\mathrm{aq}) \rightarrow \mathrm{NaCl}(\mathrm{aq})+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}(\mathrm{l})$.   
(B) $\mathrm{CuSO}_4(\mathrm{~s})+5 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}(\mathrm{l}) \rightarrow \mathrm{CuSO}_4 \cdot 5 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}$ (s).     
(C) $\mathrm{CaCO}_3$ (s) $\rightarrow \mathrm{CaO}$ (s) $+\mathrm{CO}_2$ (g).   
(D) $\mathrm{NaCl}(\mathrm{aq})+\mathrm{AgNO}_3(\mathrm{aq}) \rightarrow 
\mathrm{NaNO}_3(\mathrm{aq})+\mathrm{AgCl}(\mathrm{s})$. 

### 2. Which of the following is not an example of a decomposition reaction?
(A) $\mathrm{CaCO}_3(\mathrm{~s}) \rightarrow \mathrm{CaO}(\mathrm{s})+\mathrm{CO}_2(\mathrm{~g})$.   
(B) $2 \mathrm{KClO}_3(\mathrm{~s}) \rightarrow 2 \mathrm{KCl}(\mathrm{s})+3 \mathrm{O}_2(\mathrm{~g})$.   
(C) $\mathrm{Ca}(\mathrm{OH})_2 \rightarrow \mathrm{CaO}(\mathrm{s})+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}(\ell)$.   
(D) $\mathrm{CuSO}_4 \cdot 5 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}(\mathrm{s}) \rightarrow \mathrm{CuSO}_4(\mathrm{~s})+5 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}(\mathrm{g})$.    


### 3. Which one of the following statements correctly describes the role of a catalyst in a chemical reaction?
(A) A catalyst increases the temperature of the system.   
(B) A catalyst decreases the temperature of the system.   
(C) A catalyst decomposes the reactants.    
(D) A catalyst lowers the energy of activation of the system.  

### 4. What are the products of electrolysis of a aqueous solution of sodium chloride using inert electrodes?
(A) $\mathrm{Cl}_2$ at anode and $\mathrm{H}_2$ at cathode    
(B) $\mathrm{Cl}_2$ at anode and Na at cathode    
(C) $\mathrm{Cl}_2$ at anode and $\mathrm{O}_2$ at cathode    
(D) $\mathrm{O}_2$ at anode and $\mathrm{H}_2$ at cathode    

### 5. $\mathrm{aMg}_3 \mathrm{~N}_2+\mathrm{bH}_2 \mathrm{O} \rightarrow \mathrm{cMg}(\mathrm{OH})_2+\mathrm{dNH}_3$
When the equation is balanced, the coefficients $a, b, c, d$ respectively are
(A) 1, 3, 3, 2    
(B) $1,6,3,2$    
(C) $1,2,3,2$    
(D) $2,3,6,2$    

### 6. When a sample of copper (II) carbonate was heated in a hard glass test tube, a gas 'A' was evolved which turned lime water milky and a black residue ' $B$ ' was left in the test tube. When ' $B$ ' was dissolved in warm dilute sulphuric acid, a blue solution ' C ' was obtained. The correct identification of $\mathrm{A}, \mathrm{B}$ and C is given by
(A) $\mathrm{A}=\mathrm{CO}_2, \mathrm{~B}=\mathrm{CuO}, \mathrm{C}=\mathrm{CuSO}_4$    
(B) $\mathrm{A}=\mathrm{CO}, \mathrm{B}=\mathrm{Cu}_2 \mathrm{O}, \mathrm{C}=\mathrm{CuSO}_4$    
(C) $\mathrm{A}=\mathrm{CO}_2, \mathrm{~B}=\mathrm{CuO}_2, \mathrm{C}=\mathrm{Cu}(\mathrm{OH})_2$    
(D) $\mathrm{A}=\mathrm{CO}, \mathrm{B}=\mathrm{CuO}, \mathrm{C}=\mathrm{Cu}_2 \mathrm{O}$    
(E) None of these

### 7. Which of the following is not a thermal decomposition reaction?
(A) $2 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O} \rightarrow 2 \mathrm{H}_2+\mathrm{O}_2$    
(B) $2 \mathrm{FeSO}_4 \rightarrow \mathrm{Fe}_2 \mathrm{O}_3+\mathrm{SO}_2+\mathrm{SO}_3$    
(C) $\mathrm{ZnCO}_3 \rightarrow \mathrm{ZnO}+\mathrm{CO}_2$    
(D) $2 \mathrm{KClO}_3 \rightarrow 2 \mathrm{KCl}+3 \mathrm{O}_2$    

### 8. Which of the following reaction will occur?
(A) $2 \mathrm{Ag}+\mathrm{Cu}\left(\mathrm{NO}_3\right)_2 \rightarrow 2 \mathrm{AgNO}_3+\mathrm{Cu}$    
(B) $\mathrm{Cu}+\mathrm{ZnSO}_4 \rightarrow \mathrm{CuSO}_4+\mathrm{Zn}$    
(C) $2 \mathrm{Ag}+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{SO}_4 \rightarrow \mathrm{Ag}_2 \mathrm{SO}_4+\mathrm{H}_2$    
(D) $2 \mathrm{Al}+3 \mathrm{FeSO}_4 \rightarrow \mathrm{Al}_2\left(\mathrm{SO}_4\right)_3+3 \mathrm{Fe}$    

### 9. In the reaction, $\mathrm{Br}_2+2 \mathrm{I}^{-} \rightarrow 2 \mathrm{Br}^{-}+I_2$, the oxidizing agent is
(A) $\mathrm{Br}_2$    
(B) $\mathrm{I}^{-}$    
(C) $\mathrm{Br}^{-}$    
(D) $\mathrm{I}_2$    

### 10. In the reaction, $2 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{~S}+\mathrm{SO}_2 \rightarrow 3 \mathrm{~S}+2 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}$
(A) $\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{~S}$ has been oxidized    
(B) $\mathrm{SO}_2$ has been oxidized    
(C) $\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{~S}$ is the oxidizing agent    
(D) $\mathrm{SO}_2$ is the reducing agent    