---
layout: default
title: 1.5 The Effects of Oxidation Reactions 
nav_order: 5
description: ""
has_children: true
parent: FIITJEE Phase 5 Chemistry
grand_parent: Class 10 Chemistry
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---
# The Effects of Oxidation Reactions in Every Day Life
## Corrosion:
When a metal is attacked by substance around it such as moisture, acids etc, it is said to be corroded and this process is called corrosion. Due to corrosion the new iron articles get coated with a reddish brown powder when left for some time.
The black coating on silver and the green coating on copper are other examples of corrosion. Corrosion causes damages to car bodies, bridges, iron railings, ships and to all objects of metals.
Corrosion of iron is called rusting and its a serious problem. Every year an enormous amount of money is spent to replace damaged iron.
The rusting of iron can be prevented by painting, oiling, greasing, galvanizing, anodizing or making alloys. Galvanization is a method of protecting steel and iron from rusting by coating them with a thin layer of zinc.
## Rancidity
The most important cause of deterioration in fats and fatty foods is oxidation. Oxidation of fats results in the replacement of an oxygen ion for a hydrogen ion in the fatty acid molecule. This substitution destabilizes the molecule and makes it possible for other odd chemical fragments to find a place along the chain. What we perceive is an unpleasant change in the flavour and odour of a food is called rancidity. Unsaturated fats are more susceptible to oxidation than are saturated fats. Factors which accelerate fat oxidation include trace metals (iron, zinc, etc.), salt, light, water, bacteria, and molds. Fat oxidation can be retarded by use of antioxidants, by use of spices such as sage and rosemary, and by use of light and/or air tight wrapping. Some high fat foods such as potato chips are packaged in materials that protect them from oxygen and the containers are flooded with nitrogen to further exclude oxygen. The nitrogen also serves as a cushion to minimize breakage of the chips during transport.  
As soon as a food, feed, or ingredient is manufactured, it begins to undergo a variety of chemical and physical changes. Oxidation of fats is one common and frequently undesirable chemical change that may impact flavour, aroma, nutritional quality and in some cases, even the texture of a product. The chemicals produced from oxidation of fats are responsible for rancid flavours and aromas. Vitamins and other nutrients may be partially or entirely destroyed by highly reactive intermediates in the fats oxidation process. Oxidized fats can interact with proteins and carbohydrates causing changes in texture. Of course, not all fats oxidation is undesirable. Enzymes, for example, promote oxidation of fats membranes during ripening of fruit. For most products, though, predicting and understanding oxidation of fats is necessary to minimize objectionable flavours and aromas arising from fat rancidity.


<font color="#7612ce"><b>$\sigma$ Illustration 5</b></font>:

Aluminium burns in chlorine to form aluminium chloride, $\mathrm{AlCl}_3$. Write a balanced equation for this reaction.
Solution:

$
2 \mathrm{Al}+3 \mathrm{Cl}_2 \longrightarrow 2 \mathrm{AlCl}_3
$

<font color="#7612ce"><b>$\sigma$ Illustration 6</b></font>:

What type of reactions are represented by the following equations:  
(a) $2 \mathrm{FeSO}_4$ $\qquad$ $\rightarrow \mathrm{Fe}_2 \mathrm{O}_3+\mathrm{SO}_2+\mathrm{SO}_3$  
(b) $2 \mathrm{AgNO}_3+\mathrm{Cu} \longrightarrow \mathrm{Cu}\left(\mathrm{NO}_3\right)_2+2 \mathrm{Ag}$  

Solution:
(a) decomposition;
(b) displacement

<font color="#7612ce"><b>$\sigma$ Illustration 7</b></font>:

Balance the following reactions and indicate which types of chemical reaction are being represented:  
(a) $\mathrm{NaBr}+\mathrm{Ca}(\mathrm{OH})_2 \longrightarrow \mathrm{CaBr}_2+\mathrm{NaOH}$  
(b) $\mathrm{NH}_3+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{SO}_4 \longrightarrow\left(\mathrm{NH}_4\right)_2 \mathrm{SO}_4$  
(c) $\mathrm{C}_5 \mathrm{H}_9 \mathrm{O}+\mathrm{O}_2 \longrightarrow \mathrm{CO}_2+\mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}$  