---
layout: default
title: 1.7 FORMULAE \& CONCEPTS AT A GLANCE
nav_order: 7
description: ""
has_children: true
parent: Class 10 Chemistry
grand_parent: Class 10
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---
# FORMULAE \& CONCEPTS AT A GLANCE


1. The following observations help us to determine whether a chemical reaction has taken place.  
$\quad$(a) Change in state  
$\quad$(b) Change in colour  
$\quad$(c) Evolution of a gas  
$\quad$(d) Change in temperature  
2. Law of Conservation of Mass: It states that, "Mass can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction, i.e., the total mass of the elements present in the products of a chemical reaction has to be equal to the total mass of the elements present in the reactants.
3. Examples of exothermic reactions are:
(a) Burning of natural gas: $\mathrm{CH}_4(\mathrm{~g})+2 \mathrm{O}_2(\mathrm{~g}) \rightarrow \mathrm{CO}_2(\mathrm{~g})+2 \mathrm{H}_2 \mathrm{O}+$ Heat
(b) Respiration process: It involves oxidation of glucose with the release of energy in the form of ATP (Adenosine Tri Phosphate).
4. Types of chemical reactions:
   
$\quad$(a) Combination or synthesis reactions  
$\quad$(b) Decomposition reactions:  
$\quad$ $\quad\rightarrow$ Thermal  
$\quad$ $\quad\rightarrow$ Photochemical  
$\quad$ $\quad\rightarrow$ Electrolytic  
$\quad$(c) Single displacement reactions  
$\quad$(d) Double displacement reactions  
$\quad$(e) Redox reactions`


5. Corrosion in case of iron is called rusting. Chemically rust is hydrated ferric oxide, $\mathrm{Fe}_2 \mathrm{O}_3 \cdot \mathrm{xH}_2 \mathrm{O}$.
$\quad$ **Note:** Gold and silver do not corrode in moist air because these are noble metals and are not attacked by air and moisture.

6. Rancidity: The most important cause of deterioration in fats and fatty foods is oxidation. Oxidation of fats results in the replacement of an oxygen ion for a hydrogen ion in the fatty acid molecule. This substitution destabilizes the molecule and makes it possible for other odd chemical fragments to find a place along the chain. What we perceive is an unpleasant change in the flavour and odour of a food, called rancidity.