---
layout: default
title: 7.1 Assignment Subjective Section A
nav_order: 1
description: ""
has_children: true
parent: 7. Assignment Index
#grand_parent: Class 9
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---
# SUBJECTIVE

## Section - A

1. Which fundamental sub-atomic particle is neutral in nature?
2. What is the nature of anode rays?
3. How cathode rays originate in the discharge tube?
4. Where is the mass of an atom concentrated?
5. Why are noble gases inert in nature?
6. What is the other name of Rutherford's model?
7. Are electrons stationary in nature?
8. How are argon and calcium related to each other?
9. Who discovered neutrons?
10. Which name is given to the digit $6.022 \times 10^{23}$ ?
11. Define atomic number?
12. How X -rays originates?
13. Discuss the nature of elementary particle and give the name of experiment regarding their discovery.
14. State the maximum number of electrons that can be accommodated in the $4^{\text {th }}$ shell of an atom.
15. Who gave the Plum-Pudding model?
16. Name the elements with electronic configuration
(i) $2,8,2$
(ii) 2,4
17. Name two isoelectronic species of neon.
18. Give two examples of isobars.
19. Mention the drawbacks of Rutherford's atomic model.
20. Explain how is it that oxygen can be represented by the symbols ${ }_8^{16} \mathrm{O}$ and ${ }_8^{18} \mathrm{O}$ at the same time?
21. What can you say about $\mathrm{e} / \mathrm{m}$ ratio of cathode rays?
22. What do you understand by X - rays? Explain their important properties.
23. Convert $12.044 \times 10^{22}$ molecules of sulphur dioxide into moles.
24. Calculate the energy per quantum associated with light of wavelengths.  
(a) $250 \times 10^{-9} \mathrm{~m}$  
(b) $4.0 \times 10^{-8} \mathrm{~cm}$  
(c) 60 mm  
25. Write down short notes on  
(i) Isotones  
(ii) Isobars  
(iii) Isotopes  
26. (a) What are Rutherford's postulates for the atom?
(b) State the conclusions drawn from Rutherford scattering experiment.
27. The electronic configuration of an element $X$ is $1 \mathrm{~s}^2, 2 \mathrm{~s}^2, 2 \mathrm{p}^6, 3 \mathrm{~s}^2, 3 \mathrm{p}^4$  
(i) What is its group number?  
(ii) What is its period number?  
(iii) How many valency electrons are present in its atom?  
(iv) What is its valency?  
(v) Is it a metal or non-metal?  
28. Why sky appears blue?
29. What is the difference between atomic mass and mass number?
30. Magnesium atom has 12 electrons.  
(a) Write its electronic configuration.  
(b) Mention the type of ion it forms and the charge on the ion  
(c) Why does element form an ion?  

## Solution

1. Neutron
2. Anode rays are made of protons
3. Cathode rays are made of electrons and move from -ve to +ve terminal
4. Nucleus
5. They have full outer shells
6. Plum cake model
7. No
8. Calcium and Argon are isobars, as both have the same mass number and different atomic numbers.
9. Was discovered by chadwick
10. Name given to the number $6.022 \times 10^{23}$, which represents a mole is called Avogadro Number.
11. Atomic number is defined as total number of protons present in an atom.
12. X-rays originates when high speed cathode rays strike a metal surface.
13. The elementary particle discovered by J.J. Thomson through its discharge tube experiment was electron. So the experiment was named as discovery of electron.  
Nature of electron:  
(i) Contains negative charge  
(ii) Have negligible mass  
(iii) It can produce mechanical effect  
14. The maximum number of electrons that can be accommodated in a shell is given by the formula $=$

    $
    \begin{aligned}
    & 2 \mathrm{n}^2 \newline
    & \text { where } n=\text { number of shells } \newline
    & \begin{aligned}
    \therefore \quad \text { Number of electrons } & =2(4)^2 \newline
    & =2 \times 16 \newline
    & =32
    \end{aligned}
    \end{aligned}
    $

15. Thomson's model is generally known as Plum Pudding Model.
16. (i) Electronic configuration $=2,8,2$

    Atomic number $=12$
    $\therefore \quad$ Element $=\mathrm{Mg}$ (Magnesium)
    (ii) Electronic configuration $=2,4$  

    Atomic number $=6$  
    $\therefore$ Element $=\mathrm{C}$ (Carbon) 

17.   
     (a) Fluoride ion $\left(\mathrm{F}^{-}\right)$  
    (b) Oxide ion $\left(\mathrm{O}^2\right)$  
18. Examples of isobars  
(i) Ar-40 and $\mathrm{Ca}-40$
(ii) C-14 and N-14

    Isobars are atoms (nuclides) of different chemical elements that have the same number of nucleons. Correspondingly, isobars differ in atomic number (or number of protons) but have the same mass number. An example of a series of isobars is ${ }^{40} \mathrm{~S},{ }^{40} \mathrm{Cl},{ }^{40} \mathrm{Ar},{ }^{40} \mathrm{~K}$, and ${ }^{40} \mathrm{Ca}$.
19. Problems with Rutherford's model
    : It can not explain the stability of atoms.
20. ${ }_8^{16} \mathrm{O}$ and ${ }_8^{18} \mathrm{O}$ are different isotopes of oxygen as they have same atomic number but different mass number.
21. $\mathrm{e} / \mathrm{m}$ ratio of cathode rays is independent of electrode as well as the gas inside the discharge tube.
22. X-rays were emitted when cathode rays struck to the heavy metal at high voltage. They are used to observe shadow of bones to see fractures and deformities.   
**Properties**   
(a) They travel in straight line.  
(b) They do not bent in electric and magnetic field.  
(c) They are electromagnetic waves of very short wavelength.  
23. One mole of a substance contains \(6.022\times 10^{23}\) molecules. This number is also known as Avogadro's number.   
Moles = $ \frac{12 \times 10^22}{60.22 \times 10^22}$ = $\mathrm{0.2} \textbf{ mles}$

24. 
    $
    \begin{aligned}
    &\text { Use, } \newline
    &\begin{aligned}
    & \mathrm{E}=\mathrm{hc} / \lambda \newline
    & \lambda=250 \times 10^{-9} \mathrm{~m} \newline
    & \mathrm{E}=6.6 \times 10^{-34} \times 3 \times 10^8 /\left(250 \times 10^{-9}\right) \mathrm{J}=7.95 \times 10^{-19} \mathrm{~J}
    \end{aligned}
    \end{aligned}
    $
    Similarly calculate for other wavelengths.

25. **Isotones**: Same number of neutrons,   
    
    **Isobars**: Do you know isobars were originally called as “isobares”? Isobars are atoms or nuclides of separate chemical elements having the same number of nucleons (protons+ neutrons). The name was given by Alfred Walter Stewart in 1918. It is originally taken from the combination of Greek words- isos means equal and bar means weight.


    **Isotopes**: Isotopes are atoms with varying numbers of neutrons but the same number of protons, i.e. isotopes are elements with the same atomic number but distinct mass numbers.

26. Rutherford postulates: Plum cake model of atom
27. The electronic configuration of an element $X$ is $1 \mathrm{~s}^2, 2 \mathrm{~s}^2, 2 \mathrm{p}^6, 3 \mathrm{~s}^2, 3 \mathrm{p}^4$  
        (i) What is its group number?  
        (ii) What is its period number?  
        (iii) How many valency electrons are present in its atom?  
        (iv) What is its valency?  
        (v) Is it a metal or non-metal?  

    Answers 
        (i) The oxygen family, also called the chalcogens, consists of the elements found in Group 16 of the periodic table and is considered among the main group elements. It consists of the elements oxygen, sulfur, selenium, tellurium and polonium. These can be found in nature in both free and combined states.30 Jun 2023  
        (ii) Atomic number 16, have 2,8,6 configuration and it has 6 valence electrons in the third orbit. So, it belongs to 3rd period.
        (iii) 6  
        (iV) 2 
        (V) Non metal
28. Why sky appears blue?
29. Mass number is whole number because it is the sum of number of protons and number of neutrons where as atomic mass is fractional because it is the average relative mass of its atoms as compared with mass an atom of $\mathrm{C}^{12}$ isotope taken as 12.
30. Magnesium atom has 12 electrons.  
(a) Write its electronic configuration.  $1s^2\textbf{ }2s^2\textbf{ }2p^6\textbf{ }3s^2$
(b) Mention the type of ion it forms and the charge on the ion 
    Cation by loosing electrons
(c) Why does element form an ion?  
    By loosing or gaining electrons