---
layout: default
title: 7.2 Assignment Subjective Section B
nav_order: 1
description: ""
has_children: true
parent: 7. Assignment Index
#grand_parent: Class 9
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---
# Section - B
1. How ${ }_{17}^{35} \mathrm{Cl},{ }_{17}^{37} \mathrm{Cl}$ are related?
2. How to calculate the maximum number of electrons in a shell?
3. What are the relative charges of electron and neutron?
4. Write down the isotopes of hydrogen.
5. How many neutrons are present in a sodium atom?
6. What is an $\alpha$-particle?
7. What are isobars?
8. What are isotones?
9. How many isotopes does hydrogen have?
10. How many neutrons does ${ }_6^{12} \mathrm{C}$ and ${ }_6^{14} \mathrm{C}$ contain?
11. What is the relative charge of a proton?
12. What is the relative mass of a proton?
13. Name two radioactive elements used during $\alpha$-scattering experiment:
14. What information regarding an atom were obtained from Rutherford's experiment?
15. The mass number of an element is 63 . It contains 29 electrons. What is the number of protons and neutrons in it? What is the atomic number of the element?
16. What are cathode rays and how do they differ from positive rays?
17. Write down the electronic configuration of $\mathrm{C}, \mathrm{K}, \mathrm{Cr}$ and Cu and also discuss their valency and position in periodic table.
18. Atomic radius of the order of $10^{-10} \mathrm{~m}$ and nuclear radius is of the order of $10^{-15} \mathrm{~m}$. Calculate what fraction of atom is occupied by nucleus.
19. The ionization energy of H atom is 13.6 eV . What will be ionization energy of $\mathrm{He}^{+}$and $\mathrm{Li}^{2+}$ ions?
20. What are the electromagnetic waves corresponding to following wavelengths?  
(a) $10^{-13} \mathrm{~m}$  
(b) $10^{-10} \mathrm{~m}$  
(c) $10^{-8} \mathrm{~m}$  
(d) $10^{-3} \mathrm{~m}$  
(e) $10^4 \mathrm{~m}$  
21. Give the number of neutrons in an atom of the isotope ${ }_{47}^{107} \mathrm{Ag}$.  
22. Derive a relationship between the atomic number, mass number and number of neutrons in an atom.  
23. Write down the electronic configurations of the following:
(a) Na (11)  
(b) Cl (18)  
(c) $\mathrm{K}(19)$  
24. The atomic number of sodium is 11 . How many protons are there in the nucleus of sodium atom? How many electrons does an atom of sodium contain? How many electrons and protons does an ion of sodium have which has a charge of +1 ?  
25. Calculate the atomic number and the mass number of the element whose nucleus contains 11 protons and 12 neutrons.  
26. The relative atomic mass of an element $A$ is 16.2 . There are two isotopes ${ }_8^{16} A$ and ${ }_8^{18} A$ of the element. Calculate the percentage of these two isotopes present in the element.  
27. Natural chlorine contains chlorine in the form of the isotope ${ }^{35} \mathrm{Cl}(75.5 \%)$ and ${ }^{37} \mathrm{Cl}(24.5 \%)$. Calculate the average atomic mass of natural chlorine.  
28. A naturally occurring sample of copper consists of $69.2 \%$ of ${ }^{63} \mathrm{Cu}$ and $30.8 \%$ of ${ }^{65} \mathrm{Cu}$. The relative mass of ${ }^{63} \mathrm{Cu}$ is 62.93 and that of ${ }^{65} \mathrm{Cu}$ is 64.93 . Find the atomic mass of a naturally occurring sample of copper.  
29. Define the terms orbit, orbital and subshells.  