---
layout: default
title: 1.1 Formulas at Glance
nav_order: 2
description: ""
has_children: false
parent: Class 9 Fiitjee Phasebook
# grand_patent: Class 9
tags: [MathJax, Mathematic]
mathjax: true
---
<script
  type="text/javascript" id="MathJax-script" async
  src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-svg.js">
</script>

## FORMULAS AND CONCEPTS AT A GLANCE

1. Inertia is a property of any body to resist the change in its state of rest or motion
2. Inertia is of three types (i) inertia of rest (ii) inertia of motion. (iii) inertia of direction
3. According to Newton's first law of motion a body in rest or in uniform motion will remain in the same stato unless a net extornal force is applied on it.
4. Lineer momentum of a body of mass $m$ and velocity $\overrightarrow{\mathrm{v}}$ is $\overrightarrow{\mathrm{p}}=\mathrm{m} \overline{\mathrm{v}}$
5. Newton's second law of motion states that the rate of change of momentum of a body is equal the force applied on that body, and takes place in the direction of applied force.
$$
\overline{\mathrm{F}}=\frac{\Delta \overrightarrow{\mathrm{p}}}{\Delta \mathrm{t}} \text {, Its unit is "Nowton denoted by } \mathrm{N} \text {. }
$$
6. Newton's third law of motion states that to every action there is an equal and opposite reaction
7. Any reference frame which is either at rest or moving with a uniform velocity is an inertial frame reference. Neuton's $1^{\text {at }}$ law is valid in this reference frame.
8. Any reference frame which is accelerating or retarding with respect to an inertial frame is cale non-inertial frame of reference.
9. Friction is a tangential contact force which opposes the tendency of relative motion or relative motion between the two surfaces in contact.
10. Force of static friction is a self adjusting force.

